
As an exponent of the E-Prime dialect of English, I presently refuse to use any form of to be in what I write and/or say. The underlying theory suggests that I may expect to derive certain distinct advantages from complying with this constraint. When I tabulate these advantages, I generally place near the bottom of the list the structural fact that by rejecting to be I make it impossible for me to generate locutions in the passive voice. When I restrict myself to active voice by using E-Prime, so the argument goes, then I must bring out of hiding the agents involved in whatever situations I set out to discuss. This constraint supposedly prevents me from unawarely using psychological tricks such as concealed denial, self-reproach, blame-casting, unaware projecting, etc. In that sense, I can use E-Prime to help keep me honest with myself. Certain experiences from my past tell me that to achieve that, I need all the help I can find.

Perhaps, on first blush, this supposed advantage may sound trivial, unimportant. "Bring the agents out of hiding" — very nice, but does it matter? Well, let me tell you a tale, and then I’ll turn you loose to draw your own conclusions.

This incident occurred in the spring of 1972, a few weeks after a Named Professor of Physics at a prominent Eastern university had invited me to give a brief guest lecture to his research group. He had become interested in studying social systems by the methods of physics, and had already gathered together a diverse company of colleagues.

The research group met for an hour once a week, each time to hear and discuss two twenty-minute presentations. By that time, I had written a comprehensive theory of human behavior, and had mathematized it — framed it as an axiomatic system stated in a set theory notation. A few months previously, I had done a research study which involved movies taken of non-verbal encounters between unselected strangers and a known participant. I had shown these recorded encounters to panels of independent judges, who rated each one on a scale derived from my theory. Then I had done the appropriate statistics to establish the degree of inter-judge agreement (which turned out quite high). Perhaps I had something to offer to The Professor and the eclectic company of his colleagues. So I prepared a twenty-minute talk on this study, complete with overhead transparencies to present my data and conclusions.

When I gave my talk, I started off by stating the fundamental question which my long-term study of human behavior asks and answers:

We humans function as dynamically-changing organisms, dealing with our dynamically-changing environments; and we guide ourselves mainly by sensory intake, which remains intrinsically inaccurate, incomplete, and self-referential. Operating within these daunting constraints, we nevertheless manage to keep ourselves more or less intact, and more or less growing, from one moment to the next for a whole lifetime.

My question: How do we do it?





